---
title: FAQ
date: 2013-10-02
layout: page
---

## Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

### Introduction

This web page is intended to address some of the most common questions
you may have about Avare. For topics not covered here, please read the
Help page built into Avare (tap the Map tab, then the Menu button,
then the **Help** button. That in-app Help is the most current, though
to keep Avare small and quick it is brief. If you don't find answers
there, please search our **[Forum](https://apps4av.net/site/forum/"Forum")**. 
New features are usually announced on the 
[**Avare Play Store**](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ds.avare "Avare on Play Store")
page but, we want to help so **please** do NOT post questions or
report issues there - use our Forum because we do not monitor Google
Play. Some infrequently updated introductory basics and tips may also
be found on our 
[**Avare YouTube Channel**](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC0OSj8qmkSg01DIilEzxHGg "Avare YouTube Channel").

### Trouble?

If you're having any sort of trouble with Avare, please read this
first. We have designed Avare to run fast and reliably on nearly all
Android devices, and all minor bugs have been quickly found and
fixed. So if you're having a problem, it can almost always be solved
by doing two things:

1.   **Ensure that Avare is the only app running.**_ We follow Android
	 guidelines, so app conflicts are rare but some apps may still
	 cause problems. Restart your device and make sure only the core
	 apps are running (unlike Avare some downloaded apps install
	 themselves to launch on every restart, so they must be manually
	 stopped to test whether that solves your problem).
1.   _**Ensure that your device doesn't have corrupted memory.**_ Many
     users have reported odd or intermittent problems with Avare, only
     to eventually discover that the cause is a failing memory chip
     (possibly even the chip built into their device). Avare uses
     memory frugally but due to displaying maps and other features
     still uses more than most apps, making hardware memory problems
     more likely to manifest.

Whether or not you resolve a problem, you can help all users by
posting to our Forum. Please include a detailed description of the
problem; results from anything you've tried; the make, model, serial
number of your device; and the versions of Avare and Android.

### **Frequently Asked Questions**

**I downloaded and Installed Avare, why do I get a blank / black
screen?** In order to get a location on the chart displayed you must:
a-Have Avare installed b-Download the Databases file c-Download at
least 1 chart (Sectional, etc.) in your local area d-Have a good GPS
location acquired with Avare in Navigate mode \*\*_Note_ that you can
view charts without GPS in Simulation mode (tap the Map tab, the Menu
button, and toggle the Navigate/Simulation button). Be sure to then
ensure you have selected the chart type of a local chart you have
downloaded (Sectional, etc.) using Map->Menu->Sectional (or whatever
the currently selected chart type name is shown on the bottom-right
button). Then just tap the Find tab and type in the 3-letter code
(e.g. LAX) for an airport on that chart and tap the Center button.

**I Downloaded Databases and a chart for the area. Why do I get a "The
required data file is missing and must be downloaded" or "Download
Charts for this area" red message?**

Most likely your device isn't getting a good GPS signal. Look in the
upper right for that warning, or check the Tools tab in Avare. It can
also be a mismatch of the Databases and the Charts version, try
downloading them again. \*\*_Note_ that if you zoom all the way out
you'll probably see most of the U.S. even without any charts
downloaded, because the Databases file contains a low resolution
U.S. map that's displayed at wide zoom.

**Is there a way to display the Chart or location without a good GPS
signal?**

Yes, but must have the Databases and a local chart downloaded and
selected: a-Avare in Simulation mode. Tap the Map tab, then the Menu
button, then the Navigate (or Simulation) button. This button toggles
between the Navigate and Simulation modes, so the button label changes
accordingly. b-Create a Flight Plan. Tap "Plan", from the bottom tabs,
and in the upper left window that will show up, enter the names of one
of your local airports in the form of kxxx kyyy and tap Plan to the
right of the window, answer "OK" to "..Clear current".. At this point
you have the option Save your plan for later use, tap in the window
above "Save" and enter a name tap "Save" (you should see your plan
name in the left side window) or just tap "Inactive" which will toggle
to "Active". Tap "BackArrow" or "Map" under "Save-Active" and if
you've done everything right you should see the aircraft symbol and a
course line to your Destination, and the red "Simulation" warning in
the upper right. c-If you have the Avare Addon / Avare External I/O,
you can use the GPS Sim mode, or use a Flight Simulator like MSFSX,
XPlane, Flight gear, without having to go in the Simulation mode. Not
described here, see additional info on how to use these options in our
Apps4Av Forum.

**How do I disable / remove a Destination?**

Long press on the Destination point on the chart, or in "Plan" tab
(text mode) and select Delete from the pop up choices.

**Can I use External SD cards to store the Charts in devices that have that option?**

Yes there is a procedure that has worked and been tested in Samsungs
and LGs, **but** it may not work on some devices and may be disabled
by updates issued by Android, manufacturers or service
providers. Search the Forum for more current and specific answers to
this question. A procedure that has worked previously in different
versions follows:

Use My Files" or "ES File Explorer" to create the Directory /
Folder. a-Create a folder in the Root of your External SD Card
(external for the devices that allow it like Samsung) named
Android/Data/com.ds.avare. End result should look something look this:
/storage/external\_SD/Android/data/com.ds.avare (Ver 4.4.2) or
/storage/extSDCard/Android/data/com.ds.avare (Ver 4.1.0) Note: Samsung
names their internal SD card as SDCard0, just to confuse the
situation. b-In Avare Menu>Preferences> Chart Storage Folder> Navigate
with the Up arrow to that folder you created and Select (OK)
it. Verify your work and be prepared to re download Databases and
maybe the Charts. I was able to move and use the charts after the
location change.

**Can I insert new waypoints after I created a Flight Plan?**

Yes. You Long press(may take >5 sec. in some cases) on the location
you want added to your Flight Plan, Avare will pop up choices
">Destination" or "+Plan", choose "+Plan" and Avare will ad that new
point to the list and draw a new Course line for you. If the added
point is Not in the proper sequence (you need), you can go to "Plan"
tap and hold hand grab icon and move to the desired location. Note:
the procedure works best if you add a point in the leg after the leg
you are presently on.

**NOTE:** Avare has a "rubber band" feature, so that you can
long-press on the course line of an Active Plan and drag it wherever
you like on the chart. It will be automatically added to the Plan,
though sometimes it may be inserted out of sequence so you'd need to
use the up or down buttons in the Plan tab to correct it.

<!--
* * *

### **Other Frequently Asked Questions**

Click any Question in this list, or [click here](#qaList) to just browse the text.

_\* [Where did the Avare name come from?](#avareName)_

_\* [Does Avare meet FAA chart requirements?](#faaReq)_

_\* [How accurate is Avare's GPS position?](#accuracy)_

_\* [Is there a fix for low internal storage?](#storage)_

_\* [Can I install Avare on devices w/o a GPS?](#noIntGPS)_

_\* [Where can I get Avare besides the Play store?](#noGplay)_

_\* [Why is there a black screen and no chart?](#blackScr)_

_\* [How do I display an Airport Diagram?](#airpDiag)_

_\* [How much memory does Avare use?](#memSize)_

_\* [Can I briefly disable GPS moving map?](#mmapOff)_

_\* [Where is Avare's "Menu" button?](#optKey)_

_\* [Can I enter GPS coordinates as Destination?](#enterGPS)_

_\* [How can I quickly switch airport A/FDs?](#afdSwitch)_

_\* [How do I exit Avare to close or Restart it?](#exit)_

_\* [How do I briefly switch to another app?](#switchApp)_

_\* [How do I get Avare to display FAA TFRs?](#Tfr)_

_\* [How is the Time to Destination calculated?](#timeCalc)_

_\* [Where are airport runways or frequencies?](#runway)_

_\* [Can battery level affect my internal GPS?](#battGPS)_

_\* [How can I get Destination charts to display longer?](#dispLong)_

_\* [What's in the Databases file Avare uses?](#dBase)_

_\* [How do I browse charts and then get back to current location?](#browse)_

_\* [How are Obstacles shown?](#Obstacles)_

_\* [What is a complete Exit?](#completeshutdown)_

* * *

**Frequently Asked Questions, _and Answers_**

_**\* Where did the Avare name come from?**_
Avare (pronounced **ə-ˈver** – sounds like “ah**v**air” – think
“aware” with a V) is a contraction of the words **Av**iation
(Situational) Aw**are**ness. So you can use Avare to more conveniently
be Aware of aviation information in flight and for planning purposes.

_**\* Does Avare meet FAA chart requirements?**_ For the latest
official FAA rulings on the use of non-FAA Certified apps such as
Avare (or Foreflight, etc.), please refer to FAA rulings directly. The
FAA rulings and guidelines are currently diverse and changing rapidly,
but _our understanding_ as of December 2019 is that non-commercial
operators of small aircraft may use non-FAA Certified apps like Avare
on portable devices like tablets or phones for any purpose (e.g. EFB)
other than primary GPS navigation.

_Our understanding_ is that primary VFR nav may include reference to
current Avare charts, with Avare GPS for secondary nav, and that only
Certified (and probably permanently installed) RAIM GPS devices may be
used for primary IFR navigation. Users of Avare have reported that
they fly with Avare as a primary EFB and secondary navigation device. 
Online sources we have found to date for FAA documents on this topic
include:

-    [**AIM 1−1−17b1 Sec. c & d (pg.50) on Uncertified GPS** (pdf)](https://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/publications/media/aim_basic_8-15-19.pdf "AIM 1-1-17b")
-    **[120-76B - Guidelines ... Electronic Flight Bags](https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars/index.cfm/go/document.information/documentID/1020099 "EFB Guidelines")**
-    [**AC 91-78 - Use of ... EFB**](http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars/index.cfm/go/document.information/documentID/73540 "AC 91-78")
-    [**AC 91.21-1B - Use of Portable Electronic Devices**](http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars/index.cfm/go/document.information/documentID/22448 "AC 91.21-1B")
-    [**FSIMS 8900.1 vol. 4-1641 EFB Authorization Process**](http://fsims.faa.gov/PICDetail.aspx?docId=8900.1,Vol.4,Ch15,Sec1 "FSIMS 4-1641")

The Avare team makes available via the Download menu all data every 28
days following the FAA schedule. Some charts like the Grand Canyon and
Helicopter Charts may not be updated and should not be used for
navigation without checking the chart date. There may be a few days
lag in uploading the latest data due to limited resources on the Avare
project, and it is possible that some charts and plates may be expired
by a few days. However, plates and many charts have expiry dates
printed on them by the FAA.

**Attention:** The FAA does not approve the use of any handheld GPS
devices for primary GPS navigation on IFR flights.  As with all apps
for Android or iOS, Avare is **not** an FAA Certified app, and is not
intended as the sole source for primary navigation or information. It
is the responsibility of the pilot in command to verify that all
terminal procedures and charts are up to date before using them.

Charts and data must be up to date at all times, and **must match the
current Avare version**. If any item in the Download list is marked
red, or has a red colored icon associated with it, then that item has
expired and (after ensuring that the Avare version is current) a new
version of the Download item is available using the Update button.

Note that expired charts may display your location incorrectly due to
occasional changes in FAA charts. Do not combine expired and current
data, as it can cause GPS location issues, and chart overlapping. Also
ensure that the Avare version matches the Download materials you are
using (e.g. check Play Store first to get the latest Avare, then click
Update in the Download screen).

_**\* How accurate is Avare's indicated GPS position?**_ Avare's GPS
screen displays the current information including Accuracy, that is
reported by your GPS hardware. Note that GPS accuracy and reliability
are not determined by Avare, but by the GPS system and your GPS
receiver hardware. Typically, users have reported accuracy to within
300 feet with their device's internal GPS (30 feet or less is not
uncommon) standing outdoors with a clear view of the sky. Accurate
results with a GPS aloft depends mostly on the particular device and
aircraft, and whether the device has a clear view of the sky in normal
use. Typically the accuracy will be best with an external WAAS GPS
receiver, but even then there is some innate inaccuracy in the GPS
system. Using our free Ad-On Bluetooth & I/O apps, you can use a
second Android device with GPS with Avare that can be placed where it
has a clear view of the sky while your device running Avare is placed
where it's most convenient in flight. External GPS receivers for
Android start at about $25.

_**\* Is there a fix for internal storage running low with Avare?**_
Avare has an option in Preferences, for selecting your storage
location for charts. It's possible that your device has free space on
an SD card or other storage medium, though this may not work on some
Android devices and versions. **Note** that you will need to
**re-Download** (or manually **relocate**) any previously Downloaded
charts after changing the storage location Preference.

You may find it easiest to simply Re-Install the Avare app. In the
Settings section of your Android device, find the Apps or Application
Manager section and use that to Uninstall Avare and thus remove all
associated files. Then use the Play Store or other method to Install
the Avare app again and **before using the Download screen**, change
the Preferences in Avare for the Charts Storage Folder. This will
minimize Avare's use of storage space in locations other than the one
you have set.

_**\* Can I install Avare on devices with no GPS?**_ Yes, Avare has
been successfully installed and used on every Android device we have
tested. Due to limitations imposed by the Google Play store, if you
can't install there you may want to read about the [Manual
Install](https://apps4av.net/site/avare-overview/avare-manual-installation/
"Avare • Manual Install") procedure. If you'd then like to add an
external GPS for Avare to use it usually works, and if not please
check out our free Add-On apps.

_**\* Where can I get Avare other than the Google Play store?**_ Avare
may be available on Fdroid, CNet, Amazon and other sources. Please use
caution, because some non-Google sources offer old versions and may
not be safe or secure. You can install Avare directly from our server
as described in our [**Manual
Install**](https://apps4av.net/site/avare-overview/avare-manual-installation/
"How To do a Manual Install of Avare") instructions on this site.

_**\* Why is there a black screen and no chart?**_ When you first
install Avare, no **Databases** file or charts are included, and
**Sectionals** is set as the default chart display type.

**Note:** Always ensure that you have the current Databases file that
is compatible with the version of Avare and the charts you are
using. The FAA occasionally changes the technical details of their
charts during their regular updates, and that can result in
incompatibility with older versions of Avare and your Databases
file. This will not be a problem for you if you ensure that any
updates you do are complete, including the Avare version and its
Databases file and charts.

If you haven't downloaded a chart yet, press your device's Menu button
then press Download and choose the chart(s) you'll be using. If you
haven't downloaded the Sectional chart for your area, doing that will
probably be helpful for your future use of Avare. To view charts other
than Sectionals (TACs for example), use Preferences and Select Chart
Type.

If after ensuring that all of the above steps are complete you still
see only a black screen, check that GPS is on with location acquired
(or enter Simulation mode) and use Find to input an airport located on
a currently installed and selected chart.

_**\* How do I display an Airport Diagram?**_ To view the Airport
Diagram (AD) for an airport, first be sure you have obtained the AD
for the region that airport is in by using the Download menu. Then use
Find or Plan to input the Destination (airport code) and press the
Plates button, then ensure you have selected "AIRPORT-DIAGRAM" from
the drop down list in the box at the center-top of the Plate screen.

_**\* How much memory does Avare use?**_ The total installed storage
memory size of Avare with the required Database is about 50MB. The
average chart is about 10MB, and the typical size with Sectionals,
WAC, TAC, and IFR charts is about 800MB. Terminal procedures are about
1GB. Note that Preferences includes an option for moving Avare files
to different storage locations such as an External SD chip on devices
and Android versions that support it. Avare uses all run time memory
that Android gives it, and is typically 32MB. To free up memory used
by Avare when you Exit, unselect "Leave Running" in Preferences.

_**\* Can I disable moving map while retaining GPS lock?**_ Just
switch to Simulation Mode. Press the Menu button, then Check tap the
Navigate button. Note that this button toggles between Navigate and
Simulation. Simulation Mode will let you use Find to jump instantly to
any airport for both display and A/FD info for that airport, while
retaining GPS signal acquisition. To view or use your current location
again, just tap the Simulation button so that it changes back to
Navigate Mode.

_**\***__**Where is _**Avare's**_ "Menu" button?**_ Menu is the button
on the bottom-left of the Map screen, just above the Map button.

_**\***__**How do I enter a GPS latitude/**__**longitude**_
_**location as Destination?**_ Press the Find button in the Menu, then
enter a latitude&longitude (use negative sign for West) pair, for
example 42.8933&-74.4422 in the search box. Select it from the list
below as the found Destination.

_**\* Does Avare work in Airplane Mode?**_ Yes, once you have used
Download to install any charts (or the set of Airport Diagrams) as
desired, all features of Avare work just fine in Airplane Mode on most
devices. Note that some devices have difficulty acquiring GPS "lock"
without cell and/or data or wifi, but will work fine in airplane mode
once lock is acquired **if** the device is kept awake and you don't
switch out of the Avare app. A few users with older devices have found
it helpful to first acquire a GPS lock with Google Maps, then exit
that app, launch Avare, and (after confirming GPS lock) activating
Airplane Mode.

_**\* How do I get distance & heading TO any point on a chart?**_ Just
long-press any point on the chart while your device has your GPS
location acquired. The course indicator line (if present) will be
hidden, and at the top of the screen you will see the Compass
Direction, Bearing, and Distance both TO and FROM your current
location. _This is handy for ATC and CTAF radio calls._ Note that if
internet access is active, METAR/TAF text may also be displayed if you
long-press on an airport.

_**\* How do I get distance & heading FROM any point on a chart?**_
Just long-press any point on the chart while your device has your GPS
location acquired. The course indicator line (if present) will be
hidden, and at the top of the screen you will see the Compass
Direction, Bearing, and Distance both TO and FROM your current
location. _This is handy for ATC and CTAF radio calls._ Note that if
internet access is active, METAR/TAF text may also be displayed if you
long-press on an airport.

_**\* How can I quickly switch between A/FDs for different
airports?**_ Often the easiest method is to use the Near button, since
you can just select from a list of the nearest airports. You can also
use the Find or Plan button to change the airport code, and then use
the A/FD button to display it.

_**\* How do I exit Avare to close or Restart it?**_ To completely
Exit Avare use your device's Back key as required until you leave
Avare. Avare is designed to completely stop all operations when you
switch to another app or to the Home screen, so you can return to it
instantly later if you choose. The only time you need to Exit is when
Avare indicates that it's required. Note that the GPS will keep
running up to two minutes after leaving Avare.

_**\* How do I switch from Avare to allow for a quick return later?**_
Simply push your device's Home key. Android also offers a feature to
switch between recent apps. Just long-press your Home key or press the
task switching key if provided, and Android will present you with a
selection of recent applications you can switch to. Note that the
internal GPS in some devices may lose GPS lock if Avare is not the
active app for more than a few minutes, so you'll want to test your
device for this in advance of flight.

_**\* How do I get Avare to display FAA TFRs?**_ You can download the
latest TFRs from the Download list under Databases. TFRs are
automatically displayed on the chart in red by default. If you
long-press the indicator at the top-center of a TFR shape, text
information (including date/time) for that TFR will be displayed at
the upper-left of the screen. Apps4av servers update TFRs every top of
the hour.

_**\* How do I use the Course line?**_ It is provided primarily for
route planning, such as to avoid obstacles or Restricted areas. It is
also useful for visually aligning the location icon "airplane" to the
line as an approximate navigation aid.

_**\* How is the Time to Destination calculated?**_ It is a simple
calculation of the time required at your current GPS ground speed if
you fly direct to the indicated bearing. It does not allow for wind or
ground course variations, but is continually updated based on your
current GPS position and ground speed.

_**\* Where can I find runway or Comm airport info?**_ First be sure
you have activated a Destination airport using Find or Plan. Then
press your device's A/FD button, then scroll through the list to see
the information available for that airport.

_**\* Can battery level affect my device's internal GPS?**_ Yes. Users
have reported that their GPS may not acquire as quickly or reliably at
low battery levels (below 30% or even higher on some
devices). Plugging your device into external power may help with your
device's internal GPS performance.

_**\* How can I get Destination charts to display longer?**_ When GPS
is active, the chart display will only briefly display to your
Destination airport just after you select one. You can switch to
Simulation Mode (press Option button, then the Navigate
button). Simulation Mode will let you jump instantly to any airport
you select, for both display and A/FD info for that airport, while
retaining GPS operation in the background. To view or use your current
location again, just press the Simulation button so it toggles back to
Navigate.

_**\* How long does it take from Avare launch before I see charts?**_
The startup time depends mostly on your device, but usually a few
seconds up to a minute. Note that no charts or Airport Diagrams can be
displayed until you Download them. If you see a black screen, chances
are your GPS isn't working yet or you haven't downloaded the Databases
file or the Sectional chart for your area.

_**\* Can I use Avare without cell or data service?**_ Yes, once you
have used Download to install any charts (or the set of Airport
Diagrams) as desired, all features of Avare work just fine in airplane
mode on every Android device we've tested. Note that the internal GPS
on some devices may have difficulty acquiring "lock" without cell
and/or data/wifi, but will work fine in Airplane Mode once lock is
acquired IF the device is kept awake and you don't switch out of the
Avare app.

_**\* What's in the Databases file Avare uses?**_ The file named
Databases in the Downloads list contains the current A/FD (except for
Airport Diagrams) and is also required for Avare to know the name,
boundaries and GPS calibration for each chart. Before you can use any
charts, Avare needs this information so that it can assemble all the
charts you've downloaded into a seamless mosaic. Avare then calculates
where to display your GPS location on that mosaic of downloaded
charts. Always be sure to Update Avare and Download the latest
Databases before you Download any new or updated charts (when Avare is
Updated, the Download screen's Update button will take care of the
rest). Note that if an item in the Download list has a green checkmark
at the left, it's downloaded, and latest.

_**\* How do I browse charts and then get back to current location?**_
You can browse charts by zooming and dragging them, and tap the square
center star button to resume GPS moving map. To browse freely, use
Simulation Mode, and then turn off that mode to instantly return to
your current location. In Map view press Option button, then tap the
Navigate button to toggle it to Simulation Mode. To view or use your
current location again, just tap the Simulation button to toggle it
back to Navigate.

_**\* How are Obstacles shown?**_ When "Show Obstacles" option is
checked in Preferences, all obstacles 200 feet below the GPS altitude
of your device or higher are shown. To reduce clutter, all obstacles
shorter than 500 feet AGL are removed from the FAA obstacles
database. Obstacles are shown as red triangles.

_**\* What is a complete Exit?**_ By default, Avare will keep a
background process running. This process will store important data
like the current destination, the location, the map view, the weather,
the TFRs, and the airport information. This process will wake up
periodically for a few simple tasks (fetch TFRs, weather etc.). It
will also keep the GPS on for up to 2 minutes after you exit Avare.

The background process allows you to temporarily switch to other
applications without losing the flight data, and the GPS lock.

You can completely exit Avare, and stop the background process by
unselecting "Leave Running" in the preferences list item.

-->
