---
title: Manual Install
date: 2012-10-07
layout: post
permalink: /manual-installation.html
---

These directions are for **manually** installing the current version
of Avare directly from our server, for those with Android devices who
are unable to install from the Google Play store for any reason. We
also offer older versions of Avare on our server, for those with older
devices or Android versions not supported by our latest Avare
versions. \***NOTE: _Avare versions before 8.0.8 are not functional
with current charts._** In practical terms, this means that **Android
version 4.3** (released 7/13/2012) and newer is required to use Avare
with current charts. As of this writing, there are no expired charts
supplied by Apps4Av available for use with older versions of Avare.

While far less convenient than the "one-click" installation on Google
Play, we hope these directions will be helpful for Avare users who
need a manual installation option. \***Notes:** Avare **versions older
than 8.0.8 will not work**, because the free FAA supporting files
(current charts, etc.) supplied by Apps4Av are only compatible with
versions 8.0.8 and newer. Although we endeavor to ensure the integrity
of our Manual Install versions of Avare, the Google Play Store or
another source you completely trust may be safer if you can get them
to work on your device. If your device won't install Avare on the Play
Store you might consider buying a different or newer **Android**
device (Avare is not available for iOS). The first version of the
Nexus 7 tablet can be upgraded to Android 4.4, and Apps4Av Forum users
report buying great used and even new Android devices for $50 or less.

1\. _UnInstall_.  If you have already installed Avare previously (skip
this step if you don't already have Avare installed), begin by
Uninstalling it.  This will ensure that any differences in this
version of Avare are compatible with all the files it uses.  Note: If
you are comfortable with using the Android file system, you can first
rename the Avare sub-folders inside the Android/data folder in case
you'd like to reinstall your current version after evaluating a
different one. **TO BEGIN** UnInstall: In your device Settings choose
Applications, and then Manage Applications, Downloaded, then select
Avare, and finally choose Uninstall.

2\. _Allow_.  Enable "Allow unknown sources" in your Android settings
in the Applications, Security, or Development menu (this is so that
you can Install the Avare app outside of the Google Play store). Note:
On a Droid X in Android v2.3.4 this is in Settings, Applications.

3\. _Obtain_.  To obtain the Avare app file, with your Android device
see if you can click on this link to launch your browser and
automatically go to our server page to choose a version of Avare to
download:
[**http://www.apps4av.org/share/?O=D**](http://www.apps4av.org/share/?O=D "Avare • Manual Install Links")

If your browser doesn't allow download, try using **Firefox** or some
other browser on your Android device. We recommend clicking on the
latest version of Avare for your download, but if you find that the
newest doesn't work on your device for some reason you may find some
older ones listed that you could try.

4\. _Open_.  To open the Avare app after the download is complete,
find and Click on the downloaded Avare file (typically on the SD card
in the "download" folder) to begin _**installing**_ Avare.  Note that
on some devices you may need to first install a "file manager" app to
find the **Avare.apk.zip** file and unzip it into that same
folder. Some devices may give you a warning message that something
will be erased, and if so you should cancel, create a new folder, move
the Avare.apk.zip there and then open it to Unzip. Once you have
unzipped the file, find the avare.apk file and **click to Install**
the app. After you've completed the installation and launched Avare,
you can safely delete the Avare.apk.zip file and any files or folders
created during the Unzip process.

> **Notes**: \*Unless you normally have "Allow unknown sources"
> enabled in your Android settings, after you've successfully
> installed Avare you'll want to go back to that setting and un-select
> it to provide some protection against inadvertently installing other
> apps outside the Play store in the future. \***Avare requires
> several Permissions** (such as Internet Access in order to Download
> charts and other resources). If you can't open Avare after Manual
> Install, check to ensure that all Permissions are turned on in
> Android's Settings.

If you've successfully installed Avare, _**Congratulations!**_ We're
always looking into options for making this easier, and we welcome any
feedback.

A. _First Time_.  When Avare is launched for the first time you'll
want to first get the Database file it uses and probably **Download**
some charts.  Unless some charts were previously installed, the screen
will be blank (after you read and dismiss any notifications). If the
Download screen isn't automatically displayed press the Map button,
then the square Options button above it, and the Download button in
the middle of the list that pops out. Tap the Databases line and then
the "Databases (Required)" item. If you'd like to have just the
smallest possible chart for checking out Avare, download the one for
Seward (an airport code on that chart is MDO). Tap the TFRs line if
you'd like Avare to fetch and display all current TFRs from the FAA
(note that you'll need to fetch them again any time you'd like to get
the latest, and once fetched they will still be displayed for a period
of time even with your device offline). Once you've selected the
Downloads you require, tap the "Get" button. Note that although we've
minimized them, many of the FAA files are quite large and may download
slowly and impact your data usage fees.

Note: Unless you are an advanced user familiar with your device's
Android file structure, we recommend that you allow Avare to Download
maps to the default location chosen by Android on your device.

B. _Don't Switch_.  Some devices may stop the download if you switch
to another app or the screen sleeps.  It's best to wait until a few
seconds _after_ the progress bar has disappeared before turning off
your device or switching to another app.  To quickly test Avare, press
the Options (Menu) button on your device, in Preferences turn on
Simulation Mode, then input a Destination airport that's on a chart
you've downloaded, tap the Center button, and that area of the chart
will be displayed.  The first time you view a chart, it may take a few
seconds to complete the installation and display the chart.

* * *

### Help & Info

You'll find other helpful information and useful tips in Avare's
built-in Help feature; on our
[Forum](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/apps4av-forum "Apps4Av Forum"); 
and some introductory information here on our Apps4Av website
at: [Avare • Help](https://apps4av.net/site/avare-overview/avare-help/ "Avare • Help")

Note that this procedure can be modified to work for installing a new
"beta" version of the app when one is available. Just email us if
you'd like to do a beta test and we'll send you a link to the file. To
use it you'd just substitute that link for the one in the instructions
above. Some "beta" versions of Avare may have advanced features not
yet available in the version on the Google Play store.  Any "beta"
versions have not been as fully tested on a wide variety of devices so
while they may provide more capabilities and we do of course pre-test
them on several devices before uploading to our site, there is also
some chance that they might not be as reliable on your device.

For more Help & Info, please check out our 
**[Forum](https://groups.google.com/d/forum/apps4av-forum "Avare Forum")**.
We hope you will take the time to share feedback there on how you like
the new features, and let us know of any problems you encounter.
Thank you for helping us to improve Avare!
