---
title: "Add-On Apps"
date: "2013-11-28"
tags: Obsolete
---

This is where we placed introductions to the AddOn Apps we were
creating to extend the capabilities of our early Avare aviation GPS &
EFB app. We were using this AddOn approach so that users who only
wanted the core functions of Avare, could avoid any increased need for
updates or storage space.  As with Avare, all our apps are free and
open source, with no annoying push ads or invasive
Permissions. _**NOTE:**_ In recent years the core capabilities of the
I/O app in particular have been integrated directly into Avare and
greatly improved. Most Avare users do not need either of these
apps. We retain the old Add-On apps for anyone who may still find them
useful.

**ChartSack** _Go beyond FAA charts._ This small app provides a way to
view and navigate on any map or chart. To learn more out the free open
source app [ChartSack click
here](https://apps4av.net/site/avare-overview/avare-%e2%80%a2-addon-apps/chartsack/
"Chart Sack"). _(To import and view/navigate non-FAA maps and charts
in Avare using a limited manual process, search our Forum.)_

**Avare External I/O Plugin app** _Add external GPS, ADSB, Flight Sim,
Autopilot, etc._ _**NOTE:**_ In recent years Avare has ADS-B In
included and greatly improved. Most users do not need this external
app (search our Forum for details). This free Plugin app provides
additional free connectivity between your Android device running
Avare, and most external devices built with industry standard NMEA
compatibility. This is great for connecting external ADS-B and GPS
devices with Avare via a Bluetooth or WiFi connection, for GPS and all
features of ADSB-In. This app provides NMEA output from Avare to drive
autopilots, and the MS Flight Sim, XPlane and Flightgear flight
simulators. Actual functions based on this extended connectivity are
being added and actively developed, so you'll want to watch our Forum
and the Play Store for updates. A list of some external devices known
to work with Avare may be found on our [**Compatibility**](https://apps4av.net/site/?page_id=1117)
page.

Note that this Avare External I/O Plugin app may still be
**_required_** in order for Avare to connect with **some** external
GPS units and use their location data. **NOTE:** _**No plugin is
needed for a GPS _**_**built in**_**_** to your Android device._

This Avare External I/O Plugin app requires the free Avare app, which
should be installed first.

NOTE: Based on manufacturer and carrier implementations, Android
devices handle Airplane Mode differently. If you use Avare in Airplane
Mode, the Bluetooth transceiver in your device may or MAY NOT be
active. It's possible that if Bluetooth isn't working on your device
after you activate Airport Mode, it may work if you simply turn on
Bluetooth again while in Airplane Mode. You could also further
investigate how your device actually handles airplane mode with a free
tool such as Airplane Mode Modifier.

For more information about installing and using this app, start with
the post on this website titled
[**Using the Avare External I/O Plugin app**](https://apps4av.net/site/avare-plugin-for-external-io/ "I/O app HowTo").

For further details, the very latest on new and planned features, and
to share your questions or comments please visit our
**[Apps4Av Forum](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/apps4av-forum "Apps4Av Forum")**.

**Bluetooth GPS for Avare app** _Use a second Android device as an
external GPS_ This app enables you to use the _built in_ GPS of one
Android device, to serve as the location sensor for one or more other
devices running Avare. For example if you fly with an Android tablet
that has no built in GPS or won't work on your kneeboard, you can use
an Android phone with built in GPS placed with a clear view of the sky
to supply GPS location data to your tablet via Bluetooth. _Note that
no plugin is required for Avare to use the GPS built into the Android
device on which you're running the Avare app._ This Bluetooth GPS for
Avare app merely adds the option of using another Android device as
your GPS data source for the Avare app.

_Note: you do not need this app for a non\-Android external GPS
receiver._ The Avare External I/O Plugin app is required in order for
Avare to connect with external non\-Android devices such as dedicated
GPS and ADS-B receivers. This new Bluetooth GPS For Avare app is only
needed for additionally enabling external Android devices such as
tablets or phones with _built-in_ GPS, to emulate a dedicated external
GPS unit by sending their location data to the primary device(s)
running and displaying Avare.

This enables pilots to conveniently place their primary Avare
device(s) for optimal viewing and operation in flight, and place a
secondary Android device with built in GPS receiver in the optimal
location for satellite reception (for example, beneath the windshield
with an unobstructed view of the sky). That secondary device's GPS
data is then sent via this app, to the primary Android device(s)
running Avare (such as a tablet or phone attached to the aircraft
control yoke, panel, or pilot's kneeboard).

Put your Android phones to good use, and add redundancy to GPS
navigation. For example convert your phone to a Bluetooth GPS, so it
can be placed in an appropriate location in the aircraft, for optimum
GPS signal reception. Your primary phone/tablet placed for optimum
visibility and physical access can then run Avare, and obtain GPS
location from your secondary device serving as a GPS receiver and
placed accordingly.

**Installation** Primary Device (running and displaying Avare): •
Install Install the Avare External I/O Plugin app

Secondary Device (providing GPS reception): • Install this Bluetooth
GPS For Avare app

**Setup** 1. On Secondary Device(s), launch this Bluetooth GPS For
Avare app. 2. On Primary Device, launch the Avare External I/O Plugin
app, and then the Avare app. 3. On Secondary Device(s), click the
Enable Pairing button from this Bluetooth GPS For Avare app. 4. On
Primary Device, Pair with Secondary Device using that device's
Bluetooth settings. 5. On Primary Device, launch the Avare External
I/O Plugin app, and connect to Secondary Device(s) using the External
Bluetooth GPS menu. 6. On Primary Device, start Avare and navigate.

While all this may look complex, once the initial setup is done the
routine setup and operation is fairly simple and intuitive.

Note that many dedicated external GPS receiver devices will perform
more accurately and reliably than the GPS receivers built into most
Android devices such as phones. This can be due to many factors
including the fact that the primary purpose of external units is GPS
reception; they may receive multiple GPS bands; they may access
supplementary WAAS transmissions; and they may have more sensitive
receivers with better noise rejection. Even so, the GPS built into
most Android devices will perform well when optimally placed, so we
hope this app can save you some money while providing an alternate GPS
source.

NOTE: Based on manufacturer and carrier implementations, Android
devices handle Airplane Mode differently. If you use Avare in Airplane
Mode, the Bluetooth transceiver in your device may or MAY NOT be
active. It's possible that if Bluetooth isn't working on your device
after you activate Airport Mode, it may work if you simply turn on
Bluetooth again while in Airplane Mode. You could also further
investigate how your device actually handles airplane mode with a free
app such as Airplane Mode Modifier.

Please learn more about these Avare add-on apps or share your
feedback, questions and/or comments  on our 
[Apps4Av Forum](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/apps4av-forum "Apps4Av Forum")
([https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/apps4av-forum](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/apps4av-forum "Apps4Av Forum")).
